# Headroom.js

**Give your pages some headroom. Hide your header until you need it.**

## What is it?

Headroom.js is a lightweight, high-performance pure JS widget that allows you to hide your header until needed - when the user scrolls up. The header is a living example of this.

## Why use it?

Fixed headers are a popular approach for keeping a website's primary navigation in close proximity to the user. This can reduce the effort required for a user to quickly navigate a site, though they are not without problems&hellip; 

Large screens are usually landscape-oriented, meaning less vertical than horizontal space. A fixed header can therefore occupy a significant portion of the content area.

Small screens are typically used in a portrait orientation. Whilst this results in more vertical space, because of the overall height of the screen, a meaningfully-sized header can still be quite imposing on the user.

Headroom.js allows you to bring elements into view when appropriate, and give focus to your content the rest of the time.

## How does it work?

At it's most basic headroom.js simply adds and removes CSS classes from an element in response to a scroll event:

    <!-- initially -->
    <header id="header" class="headroom">

    <!-- scrolling down -->
    <header id="header" class="headroom headroom--unpinned">

    <!-- scrolling up -->
    <header id="header" class="headroom headroom--pinned">

Relying on CSS classes affords headroom.js incredible flexibility. The choice of what to do when scrolling up or down is now entirely yours - anything you can do with CSS you can do in response to the user's scroll.

## How do I use it?

Using headroom.js is really simple. It has a pure JS API, and an optional jQuery/Zepto compatible plugin.

### With plain JS

    // Grab an element
    var myElement = document.getElementById("header")[0];
    // Construct an instance of Headroom, passing the element
    var headroom  = new Headroom(myElement);
    // Initialise
    headroom.init(); 

### With jQuery/Zepto

    // Simple as this!
    // init() is called implicitly with plugin
    $("# header").headroom();

The plugin also offers a data-* API if you prefer a declarative approach.

    <!-- selects $("[data-headroom]") -->
    <header id="header" data-headroom>

Note: Zepto's additional [data module](https://github.com/madrobby/zepto#zepto-modules) is required for compatibility.

### Options

Headroom.js can also accept an options object to alter the way it behaves. You can see the default options by inspecting `Headroom.options`. The structure of an options object is as follows:

    {
      offset : 0,
      tolerance : 0,
      classes : {
        initial : "headroom",
        pinned : "headroom-pinned",
        unpinned : "headroom--unpinned"
      }
    }

Offset is the distance in pixels from the top of the page before headroom starts working, i.e. when `window.scrollY >= offset`.

Tolerance makes headroom.js less sensitive to scrolling. A tolerance of `5` means the user must have scrolled at least 5px for the state to change from pinned to unpinned or vice versa.

Classes are the CSS classes applied depending on state. `initial` is applied when `init()` is called (`init()` is implicitly called when the using jQuery/Zepto plugin). `pinned` and `unpinned` are mutually-exclusive and are applied when scrolling up and down respectively.

If you're using plain JS, pass the options as the second argument to the constructor. Be aware that when using headroom in this way, the options aren't automatically merged with the defaults.

    var headroom = new Headroom(myElement, {
      offset: 200,
      tolerance : 0,
      classes : {
        initial : "foo",
        pinned : "foo-up",
        unpinned : "foo-down"
      }
    });

If you're using the jQuery/Zepto plugin, pass options as the second parameter. Options are automatically merged with the defaults using this approach (deep merged using `$.extend(true, {}, defaultOptions, yourOptions)`).

    $("#header").headroom({
      offset: 200
    });

If you're using the data-* API, define each property as a data attribute

  <header id="header" data-headroom data-offset="200" data-tolerance="5">

Options supplied via the data-* API are merged with defaults as with the plugin. Supply a JSON object to alter classes used by headroom.js

    <header id="header" data-headroom data-offset="200" data-tolerance="5" data-classes='{"pinned": "foo", "unpinned" : "bar"}'>

### Destroy

Headroom.js can cleanup after itself by calling the `destroy` method on an instance of Headroom. This detaches event handlers and removes any classes added to the target element. 

    //with plain JS
    headroom.destroy();

    //with jQuery plugin
    $("#header").headroom("destroy");